i A 
Major  Project  Report  
on 
 
Document  Image  Enhancement  using  Vision  Transformers  
Submitted  in partial  fulfilment  of the requirement  for the award  of the degree  of 
 
BACHELOR  OF TECHNOLOGY  
in 
 
COMPUTER  SCIENCE  AND  ENGINEERING  
 
Submitted  by 
 
VEDASHRI  VITTHAL  GORE  (20R91A05G2)  
SABAVAT  SWAPNA  (20R91A05E0)  
PONNALA  PRANAY  (20R91A05C6)  
 
Under  the Guidance  
of 
Dr. CH.V.  PHANI  KRISHNA  
Professor  
Department  of CSE  
 
 
Department  of Computer  Science  and Engineering  
TEEGALA  KRISHNA  REDDY  ENGINEERING  COLLEGE  
(An Autonomous  Institution)  
Medbowli, Meerpet, Saroornagar, Hyderabad – 500097  
(Affiliated  to JNTUH,  Approved  by AICTE,  Accredited  by NBA  & NAAC  ‘A’) 
(2020 -2024)  
 

ii  
TEEGALA  KRISHNA  REDDY  ENGINEERING  COLLEGE  
(Sponsored  by TKR  Educational  Society)  
Approved  by AICTE,  Affiliated by  JNTUH,  Accredited  by NBA  & NAAC -A) 
Medbowli,  Meerpet,  Saroornagar,  Hyderabad  – 500 097. 
Phone:  040-24092838 Fax: +91 -040-24092555  
E-mail:  tkrec@rediffmail.com  Website:  www.tkrec.ac.in  
  Department  of Computer  Science  & Engineering   
College  code:  R9 
 
CERTIFICATE  
 
This is to certify  that the  Major Project  report  on “Document Image  Enhancement  using  
Vision  Transformers ” is a bonafide  work  carried  out by Vedashri  Vitthal  Gore  
(20R91A05G2), Sabavat Swapna (20R91A05E0) and Ponnala Pranay (20R91A05C6) in the  
partial  fulfilment  for the award  of B.Tech.  degree  in Computer  Science  and Engineering,  Teegala  
Krishna Reddy Engineering College (TKREC -R9), Hyderabad, affiliated to Jawaharlal Nehru  
Technological  University,  Hyderabad  under  our guidance  and supervision.  
The result  of investigation  enclosed  in this report  has been  verified  and found  
satisfactory. The results embodied in the project work have not been submitted to any other  
University  for the award of  any degree.  
 
 
 
INTERNAL  EXAMINER  HEAD  OF THE  DEPARTMENT  
Dr. CH. V. Phani  Krishna  
Professor  Dr. CH. V. Phani  Krishna  
Professor  
 
………………………………..   
……………………………..  
 
 
 
 
EXTERNAL  EXAMINER  PRINCIPAL  
Dr. K. Venkata  Murali  Mohan  
Professor  
 
 
………………..………  ………………..………  
iii  
TEEGALA  KRISHNA  REDDY  ENGINEERING  COLLEGE  
(Sponsored  by TKR  Educational  Society)  
Approved  by AICTE,  Affiliated  by JNTUH,  Accredited  by NBA  & NAAC -A) 
Medbowli,  Meerpet,  Saroornagar,  Hyderabad  – 500 097. 
Phone:  040-24092838 Fax: +91 -040-24092555  
E-mail:  tkrec@rediffmail.com  Website:  www.tkrec.ac.in  
  Department  of Computer  Science  & Engineering   
College  code:  R9 
 
DECLARATION  
 
We hereby  declare  that the Major  Project  report  entitled  “Document  Image  
Enhancement using Vision Transformers” is done under the guidance of Dr. CH. V.  
Phani Krishna, Professor, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Teegala  
Krishna  Reddy  Engineering  College,  is submitted  in partial  fulfilment  of the requirements  
for the award of the degree of Bachelor of Technology in Computer Science and  
Engineering  from  Jawaharlal  Nehru  Technological  University,  Hyderabad . 
This is a record of bonafide work carried out by us in Teegala Krishna Reddy  
Engineering College and the results embodied in this project have not been reproduced  
or copied from  any source.  
 
 
 
 
Submitted  by 
Vedashri  Vitthal  Gore  (20R91A05G2)  
Sabavat  Swapna  (20R91A05E0)  
Ponnala  Pranay  (20R91A05C6)  
iv  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
 
The satisfaction  and euphoria  that accompanies  the successful  completion  of any task 
would  be incomplete  without  the mention  of the people  who made  it possible  and whose  
encouragement  and guidance  have  crowned  our efforts with  success.  
We extend  our deep  sense  of gratitude  to Dr. K. Venkata  Murali  Mohan , Principal  
Teegala Krishna Reddy Engineering College, Meerpet, for permitting us to undertake  
this project.  
We are indebted  to Dr. CH. V. Phani  Krishna,  Professor  & Head  of the 
Department , Computer Science and Engineering, Teegala Krishna Reddy Engineering  
College,  Meerpet for  his support  and guidance  throughout  our project.  
We are indebted to our guide Dr. CH. V. Phani Krishna , Professor, Computer  
Science and Engineering, Teegala Krishna Reddy Engineering College, Meerpet for his  
support  and guidance  throughout  our project.  
We are indebted to the project coordinator Mrs. P. SWETHA,  Assistant professor,  
Computer  Science  and Engineering,  Teegala  Krishna  Reddy  Engineering  College,  
Meerpet  for her support  and guidance  throughout  our project.  
Finally, we express thanks to one and all who helped us in successfully completing  
this major  project.  Further,  we would  like to thank  our family  and friends  for their moral  
support  and encouragement.  
 
 
 
 
By 
 
Vedashri  Vitthal  Gore  (20R91A05G2)  
Sabavat  Swapna  (20R91A05E0)  
Ponnala  Pranay  (20R91A05C6)  
v 
v  ABSTRACT  
 
 
Document  images  can undergo  numerous  degradation  scenarios,  
causing difficulties in recognition and processing. In the digital era, it is  
crucial to remove noise from these images to ensure their proper utilization.  
To tackle this issue, a new encoder -decoder architecture based on vision  
transformers  has been  developed  to improve  both machine -printed  and 
handwritten document images seamlessly. The encoder works directly on  
pixel  patches  along  with their positional  data,  eliminating  the need  for 
convolutional  layers,  and the decoder  recreates  a clean  image  from  the 
encoded patches. Experimental results indicate the superiority of this model  
over existing  methods on  various DIBCO  benchmarks.  
 
 
 
Keywords:  Degraded  images,  Encoder -Decoder  Architecture,  DIBCO  
CONTENTS  
 
 
TITLE  PAGE  NO 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
1.1 PROBLEM STATEMENT  01 
1.2 DESCRIPTION  01 
2. LITERATURE  SURVEY  03 
3. SYSTEM  ANALYSIS  
3.1 EXISTING  SYSTEM  04 
3.2 PROPOSED  SYSTEM  04 
3.3 SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS  05 
3.4 FEASIBILITY  STUDY  05 
4. SYSTEM  DESIGN  
4.1 SOFTWARE  DEVELOPMENT  LIFE CYCLE  (SDLC)  07 
4.2 SYSTEM  ARCHITECTURE  09 
4.3 UNIFIED  MODELING LANGUAGES  (UML)  DIAGRAMS  10 
5. IMPLEMENTATION  
5.1 MODULES  16 
5.2 DEVELOPMENT  TOOLS USED  17 
5.3 LIBRARIES  USED  20 
5.4 TECHNOLOGIES USED  21 
6. CODING  23 
7. SYSTEM  TEST  
7.1 BASICS  OF SOFTWARE TESTING  29 
7.2 FUNCTIONAL  AND NON -FUNCTIONAL TESTING  33 
8. OUTPUT  SCREENS  35 
9. CONCLUSION  38 
10. FUTURE  ENHANCEMENT  39 
11. REFERENCE  40 
 
  
LIST  OF FIGURES  
 
 
 
Figure  No.  
Figure  Description   
Page  No. 
4.1 Agile  Model  in SDLC  08 
4.2 Proposed  System  Architecture  10 
4.3 Class  Diagram  11 
4.4 Use Case  Diagram  12 
4.5 Sequence  Diagram  13 
4.6 Activity  Diagram  14 
4.7 Deployment  Diagram  15 
5.1 Python Logo  17 
5.2 Visual  Studio  Code  Logo  18 
5.3 PyTorch  Logo  19 
7.1 Black  Box and White  Box Testing  31 
7.2 Levels  of Software  Testing  32 
7.3 Functional  and Non-Functional  Testing  33 
8.1 Enhanced  image  1 35 
8.2 Enhanced  image  2 35 
8.3 Enhanced  image  3 36 
8.4 Enhanced  image  4 36 
8.5 Enhanced  image  5 37 
8.6 Enhanced  image  6 37 
 
 
1  1. INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1 Problem  Statement  
 
The main problem for this paper focuses on the degradation scenarios that  affect the 
document images, leading to challenges in recognition and processing.  Degradation scenarios 
can be blurriness, oil  stains,  water marks, pen strokes,  artefacts,  and uneven  illumination.  The 
specific  issues  faced  include  the recognition  difficulties caused by degraded images and 
necessity to denoise them for proper  usage of these images. The primary challenge addressed 
by the project is the need  to enhance  both the handwritten  and machine -printed  document  
images  by developing  a new encoder -decoder  architecture  based  on vision  transformers.  
1.2 Description  
 
Preserving  the legibility  and quality  of document  images,  especially  historical  ones,  is a 
critical  focus  within  Document  Image  Analysis  and Recognition  (DIAR) research. Historical 
documents often hold valuable information spanning  centuries and decades. However, these 
documents are susceptible to various forms  of degradation such as smears, stains, pen strokes, 
and uneven illumination, which  can hinder  their preservation.  
The presence  of such distortions  can significantly  impact  downstream  tasks  in information 
processing, including segmentation, Optical Character Recognition  (OCR), information 
spotting, and layout analysis. To address these challenges, a  robust preprocessing step is 
essential to denoise and reconstruct degraded images  into high -quality, clean versions. 
Document Image Enhancement (DIE) plays a  crucial  role in restoring  the quality  of degraded  
document  samples  to produce  clear,  uniform  images.  
Recent  advancements  in Convolutional  Neural  Network  (CNN) -based  approaches  have  
revolutionized  DIE tasks  such as binarization,  deblurring,  shadow  removal,  and watermark  
removal.  While  CNNs  have  shown  improved  performance  over traditional methods, they have 
limitations. CNNs may not be optimal for  restoring different regions of a document image due 
to their grid -based operation  and limited ability to capture  long-range  dependencies.  
In response to these limitations, Vision Transformers (ViTs) have emerged  as a promising 
alternative. ViTs split images into fixed -size patches, enabling the  capture of both local and 
global spatial dependencies. By leveraging the self - attention mechanism inspired by 
transformers in Natural Language Processing  (NLP), ViTs  excel  at capturing  global  interactions  
and contextual  features  in images.  
 
2  Our proposed Document Image Enhancement using Vision Transformer  leverages ViTs 
in an encoder -decoder framework, eliminating the need for CNNs.  This aims  to restore  and 
enhance  degraded  document  images  efficiently.  By incorporating  ViTs  and self-attention  
mechanisms,  it can recover  missing  or degraded  patches  by reasoning  globally between  
neighbouring patches.  
The innovative approach of this project introduces a transformer -based  model  for 
document  image  enhancement,  showcasing  the power  of ViTs.  Experimental  results  
demonstrate  that this project  achieves  state-of-the-art performance  in document  binarization  
tasks,  including  machine -printed  and handwritten  documents.  
3  2. LITERATURE  SURVEY  
 
1. Transformers  in Vision:  A Survey  - arXiv  
 
It discusses image restoration Transformer models for various tasks like image  super -
resolution, image enhancement, and colorization. It compares advantages and  limitations of 
popular techniques in computer vision. It highlights the applications of  transformers  in image  
processing  tasks  and provides  insights  into future  research  directions.  
2. An Overview  of Vision  Transformers for  Image  Processing:  A Survey  - 
IJACSA  
It focuses  on the success  of vision  transformer -based  models  in artificial  intelligence, 
particularly in computer vision. It emphasizes the potential applications of  vision transformers  
for student verification in  university systems.  It discusses the  importance of accurately verifying 
student identities for academic success in online  learning  environments.  
3. A Survey  on Visual  Transformer  - arXiv  
 
It provides a complete overview of transformer -based models in computer vision,  
covering object detection, image classification, and video processing. It discusses the  
applications  of transformers  in high/mid -level  vision,  low-level  vision,  and video  processing 
tasks. It highlights the performance of transformer models in various visual  tasks  and their  
potential for improving  a wide  range  of visual  applications.  
4. Vision  Transformers  in Image  Restoration:  A Survey  - MDPI  
 
It surveys the impact of Vision Transformers in image restoration tasks like image  super -
resolution, denoising, and deblurring. It compares the efficiency metrics of ViT - based models 
on different benchmarks and datasets for image restoration. It discusses  the challenges  and 
future  work  in using  Vision  Transformers  for image  restoration  tasks.  
4  3. SYSTEM  ANALYSIS  
 
3.1 Existing  System  
 
Convolutional  Neural  Networks  (CNNs)  are commonly  used for improving  document  
images.  They  work  on regular  grids  and using  the same  filter  for different  parts of a damaged 
document may not be the best choice. They struggle to capture  high-level  dependencies.  
Transformers  offers  new solutions  to address  CNN  limitations.  
Drawbacks:  
 
1. Grid-Based  Operation  
 
2. Limited  Capture  of High -Level  Dependencies  
 
3. Task -Specific  Filters  
 
4. Less Effective  for Long -Range  Dependencies  
 
 
 
3.2 Proposed  System  
 
In this proposed  system,  a simple  Document  Image  Enhancement  Transformer is used. It 
is an end -to-end approach that effectively restores and  improves  degraded  document  images.  It 
utilizes  Vision  Transformers  in an encoder - decoder framework. Document Image Binarization 
Competition (DIBCO) shows  that this achieves state -of-the-art results for both machine -printed 
and handwritten  degraded  document images  
Advantages:  
 
1. Transformer -Based  Architecture  
 
2. Encoder -Decoder  Framework  
 
3. Flexibility  and Simplicity  
5  3.3 System  Requirements  
 
3.3.1 Software  Requirements  
 
• Coding  Language  : Python  
 
• Operating  System  : Windows  
 
• Front -End : HTML,  CSS 
 
3.3.2 Hardware  Requirements  
 
• System  : Intel Core  i5 
 
• Hard  Disk  : 80 GB  
 
• RAM  : 8 GB 
 
 
3.4 Feasibility  Study  
 
In this phase, the project's feasibility is assessed, and a business proposal is  presented 
with a preliminary project plan and cost estimates. The feasibility study  of the proposed system 
is conducted during system analysis to ensure it does not  impose  a financial  burden  on the 
company.  Understanding  the major  system  requirements  is crucial  for feasibility  analysis,  with 
three  key considerations:  
• Economical  Feasibility  
• Technical  Feasibility  
• Social  Feasibility  
 
3.4.1 Economical  Feasibility  
This evaluation examines the economic impact of the system on the  organization.  Given  
limited  research  and development  funds,  expenditures  must  be justified. The system was 
developed within budget constraints by leveraging  freely  available  technologies  and only  
purchasing  customized  products.  
6  3.4.2 Technical  Feasibility  
This assessment focuses on the technical requirements of the system. It  is essential  that 
the system  does not strain  existing  technical  resources,  avoiding  excessive demands on the 
client. The developed system should have modest  technical  requirements,  necessitating  minimal  
or no changes  for implementation.  
 
3.4.3 Social  Feasibility  
This aspect evaluates the system's acceptance by users, including user  training to ensure 
efficient system utilization. Users should perceive the system  as a necessity  rather  than a threat.  
User  acceptance  depends  on effective  education  methods  and user familiarization.  Building  
user confidence  encourages  constructive  criticism,  valuable  as users  are the ultimate  
beneficiaries  of the  system.  
7  4. SYSTEM  DESIGN  
 
System  Design,  also known  as top-level  design,  focuses  on determining  the system's  
modules,  their specifications,  and their interconnections  to achieve  the intended outcomes. 
Upon completion of the system design phase, key decisions are  made  regarding  major  data 
structures,  file formats,  output  formats,  the primary  modules  within  the system,  and their 
respective  specifications.  Software  design  forms  the bedrock  of the software  engineering  
process,  transcending  development  paradigms  and application domains. It serves as the initial 
step in crafting any engineered product or  system, with the primary goal of creating a model or 
representation of the entity to be  constructed. Following the delineation and analysis of system 
requirements, system  design emerges as the fo remost technical activity among design, code, 
and test, crucial  for software  construction  and validation.  The essence  of software  design  lies in 
fostering quality within software development, providing representations that can be  evaluated  
for their quality  and serving  as the conduct  through  which  a customer's  vision  is accurately 
translated into  a final  software  product or  system.  
The design phase marks a pivotal shift from the problem domain to the solution  domain,  
guiding  the transition  from  understanding  what  is needed  to devising  how those  needs  can be met. 
System  design,  also known  as top-level  design,  outlines  the system's  modules, their 
specifications, interactions, data structures, file formats, output formats,  and major  modules,  
setting  the foundation  for the desired  outcomes.  In contrast,  Detailed Design delves into the 
internal logic of each module specified in system  design, articulating data details in a high -level 
design language independent of the  eventual  implementation  language.  Design  is fundamentally  
about  identifying  software  components, defining relationships among them, structuring 
software, and providing a  blueprint  for subsequent  phases.  
4.1 Software  Development  Life Cycle  (SDLC)  
 
SDLC  is a process  used to plan,  design,  develop,  test, deploy,  and maintain  the software  
applications.  It is used by different  software  development  organizations.  SDLC  provides  a 
systematic,  structured,  and organized  approach  to software  development.  The system  
development  life cycle  adopted  in this paper  is Agile  Methodology.  The reason  to select  this 
methodology  is due to its adaptability,  iterative  nature, and  responsiveness  to evolving  
requirements.  
8  4.1.1.  Agile  Methodology  
 
Agile Software Development is an incremental and iterative approach to  software 
development. It emphasizes flexibility, rapid iteration, and continuous  value delivery. Unlike 
other software development methods, Agile does not offer  a solution,  instead,  it offers  various  
frameworks  customized  to specific  industries,  project  types and team size.  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.1 Agile  Methodology  
 
Advantages  of Agile  Methodology:  
 
• Higher  quality  products  
 
• Increased  customer  satisfaction  
 
• Adaptability  to change  
 
• Faster  time-to-market  
 
• Enhanced  collaboration  and communication  
 
• Risk Management  

9  4.2 System  Architecture  
 
The proposed  system  architecture  consists  of the encoder -decoder  framework  which 
works  on the basis of Vision  Transformers.  
1. Input Image: Degraded Image is taken as an input, it can be handwritten or  printed.  
2. Image Patches: The input image is divided into smaller pixel patches; each  patch  
contains a  subset of pixels from the  original  image.  
3. Flattened Pixel Patches: The patches are then divided into a flattened pixel  patch which 
represents the data in one -dimensional format, making the process  further  easy.  
4. Transformer Encoder: This uses the Vision Transformers architecture and  encodes  the 
data from  the flattened  pixel  patches  using  the positional  information.  
5. Transformer  Decoder:  This decodes  the encoded  data by reconstructing  meaningful 
patterns, and uses the self -attention mechanisms for context -aware  decoding.  
6. Combined Pixel Patches: The decoded data is constructed into the combined  pixel  patch 
which represents  the segments of  the enhanced image.  
7. Enhanced Output: This assembles all the combined pixel patches to form a  complete 
enhanced image by improved quality, visual appeal, color correction  or other features.  
10   
 
 
 
Fig. 4.2 Proposed  System  Architecture  
 
 
 
4.3 Unified  Modeling  Languages(UML)  Diagrams  
 
Unified  Modeling  Language  is a graphical  language  used for visualizing,  constructing,  
and documenting  the artifacts.  UML  Diagrams  play a crucial  role in software  development  and 
used graphical  notations  to express  software  project  designs.  
The UML  Diagrams  used in this paper  are: 
 
i. Class  Diagram  
 
ii. Use Case  Diagram  
 
iii. Sequence  Diagram  
 
iv. Activity  Diagram  
 
v. Deployment  Diagram  

11  i. Class  Diagram  
 
A class diagram is a fundamental component of the Unified Modeling  Language (UML) 
used in software engineering. It provides a static view of an  application by illustrating the 
structure of the system in terms of classes, their  attributes,  methods, and relationships among 
them.  
Components  of a Class  Diagram:  
 
1. Class  Names:  The top part of the diagram  specifies  the names  of the classes.  
2. Attributes: The middle section lists the attributes associated with each class.  
3. Methods  (Operations):  The bottom  section  outlines  the methods  that a 
specific  class  can perform.  
 
Fig. 4.3 Class  Diagram  

12  ii. Use Case  Diagram  
 
A use case diagram provides a visual representation of the various ways  and scenarios in 
which a system can be used. It illustrates how users interact with  a specific  system,  whether  it is 
a website,  an app, or any other  software  application.  
Components  of a Use  Case  Diagram:  
 
1. Use Cases:  These  represent  specific  tasks,  services,  or functions  that the system  
must  perform.  It encapsulates  the system’s  functionality.  
2. Actors:  Actors  are the external  entities  that interact  with the system  and triggers  the 
use cases.  
3. Relationships:  This shows  how the actors  and use cases  are related.  
 
 
 
Fig. 4.4 Use  Case  Diagram  

13  iii. Sequence  Diagram  
 
A sequence  diagram  provides  a visual  representation  of how messages  flow within  a 
system. It is also known  as an event diagram.  
Components  of a sequence  diagram:  
 
1. Lifeline : Represented  by a vertical  bar, the lifeline  shows  the existence  of an object  or 
participant.  
2. Message  Flow : A vertical  dotted  line extends  across  the bottom  of the diagram,  indicating  
the flow of  messages between  lifelines.  
3. Iterations  and Branching : Sequence  diagrams  incorporate  loops  (iterations)  and 
conditional  branches, capturing  the system’s  behavior  comprehensively.  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.5 Sequence  Diagram  

14  iv. Activity  Diagram  
 
An Activity  diagram  in the  Unified  Modelling  Language  (UML)  serves as  a tool for 
visualizing  the flow of control  within  a system. It  mainly  focuses on  the dynamic  behavior  of the 
system.  
Components  of an activity  diagram:  
 
1. Activities : These  categorize  behavior  into one or more  actions.  An activity  is like a 
network  of nodes  connected  by edges,  representing  the flow of execution.  
2. Control  Flow : The control  flow within  an activity  is depicted  by control  nodes  and 
object  nodes.  These nodes represent  the objects  involved in  the activity.  
3. Swim  lanes : Swim  lanes  cluster  related  activities  in columns  or rows.  They  enhance  
modularity in the  diagram, although their  use is optional.  
4. Forks : Fork  nodes  generate  concurrent  flow within  the activity.  They  have  one inward  
edge  and several  outward edges.  
 
  
Fig. 4.6 Activity Diagram  

15  v. Deployment  Diagram  
 
A Deployment  Diagram  in UML  represents  how software  components  are physically  
deployed onto hardware  nodes.  
Components  of Deployment  Diagram:  
 
1. Nodes : Nodes  represent  the physical  hardware  entities  (servers,  workstations,  etc.).  
2. Components : These  represent  the software  modules  or artifacts  deployed  on nodes.  
3. Artifacts : In this, physical  files (executables,  databases)  deployed  on nodes.  
 
 
Fig. 4.7 Deployment  Diagram  

16  5. IMPLEMENTATION  
 
5.1. Modules  
 
In this paper,  there  are 2 modules  based  on the architecture  of Vision  Transformers.  
 
5.1.1.  Encoder  
 
Within  the encoding  phase,  the initial  step involves  partitioning  an image  into a collection  
of patches.  These  patches  are then transformed  into tokens,  incorporating their positional data. 
Subsequently, a series of transformer blocks is  utilized  to convert  these  tokens  into the encoded  
latent  representation.  These  blocks  adhere  to a structure  similar  to, comprising  layers  of multi -
headed  self-attention  and multi -layered  perceptron  (MLP).  Each  block  is prefaced  by a 
LayerNorm  (LN)  and succeeded  by a residual  connection.  The dimensions  of the patches'  
embedding  and the quantity  of transformer  blocks are  determined  based  on the model's size.  
a. Initial  encoding  stage  divides  image  into patches  
 
b. Patches  embedded  to create  tokens  with positional  information  
 
c. Transformer  blocks  used to  map tokens  into encoded  latent  representation  
 
d. Blocks follow structure described in reference: multi -headed self -attention  and multi -
layered perceptron layers  
5.1.2.  Decoder  
 
The decoder segment comprises a sequence of transformer blocks (equivalent  in number  
to the encoder  blocks)  that receive  the outputted  tokens  from  the encoder  as input.  These  tokens  
progress  through  the transformer  decoder  blocks  and are then projected  using  a linear  layer  to 
generate  the desired  pixel  values.  This configuration  ensures  that each output  element  
corresponds  to a vector  representing  a flattened patch in the resultant image. Ground truth pixel 
values are derived by  segmenting  the ground  truth  (GT)  clean  image  into patches  and flattening  
them  into vectors.  
a. Decoder component consists of transformer blocks, matching encoder's  number  
b. Takes  encoder's  token  sequence as  input  
17  c. Tokens  processed  within  transformer  decoder  blocks  
 
d. Projected  using linear  layer  to get pixel  values  
 
e. Each  output  element  represents  flattened patch  in resulting  image  
 
5.2. Development  Tools  used  
 
5.2.1 Python  
 
Python is used as a widely adopted high -level programming language with  a broad  
applicability.  Employed  extensively  in Web  Development,  Machine  Learning, and various 
cutting -edge technologies within the Software Industry, the  latest  version, Python  3, serves  as 
the language  of choice.  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.1 Python Logo  
 
 
One of Python's notable strengths lies in its extensive standard library,  which  proves 
invaluable  for diverse  applications,  including:  
• Machine  Learning  
 
• Web  scraping  and frameworks  
 
• Multimedia  
 
• Test frameworks  
 
• GUI Applications  
 
• Image  processing  
 
• Speech  Recognition  

18  5.2.2 Visual  Studio  Code  
 
Visual Studio Code (VS Code) is a lightweight and useful source code  editor. It offers 
robust language support, including features like IntelliSense, a  built-in debugger, and extensive 
customization options. VS Code provides a  seamless  coding  experience,  making  it a popular  
choice  for web development  and many  other fields.  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.2 Visual  Studio  Code  Logo  
 
 
Here  are the key features  of Visual  Studio Code  (VS Code):  
 
• Lightweight  and Fast 
 
• Language  Support  
 
• IntelliSense  and Code  Navigation  
 
• Built -in Debugger  
 
• Customization  
 
• Web  Technologies  
 
• Robust  Architecture  
 
 
5.2.3 PyTorch  
 
PyTorch  is a flexible  and powerful  deep  learning  framework  that has gained  popularity for 
its dynamic computation graph, making it well -suited for research  and experimentation.  Unlike  
static  graph  frameworks,  PyTorch  constructs  graphs dynamically during execution, allowing 
for easier debugging, dynamic control  flow,  and custom  gradients.   
 
 

19  Its core data structure  is the tensor,  like NumPy  arrays,  and the autograd module 
automatically computes gradients for backpropagation.  PyTorch provides a rich ecosystem of 
modules and libraries for building neural  networks,  including  pre-defined  layers,  loss functions,  
and optimizers.  Researchers  and practitioners appreciate its compatibility with the broader SciPy 
stack and its  interface that emulates MATLAB. To install PyTorch, you can use Conda or pip,  
and the community actively contributes through discussions, tutorials, and cutting - edge 
research.  In summary,  PyTorch  empowers  developers  to create  and experiment  with neural 
networks  effectively.  
 
Fig. 5.3 Pytorch  Logo  
 
Here  are some  key features  of Pytorch:  
 
• Tensor  Computation  
 
• Automatic  Differentiation  
 
• Deep  Neural  Networks  
 
• TorchServe  for Model  Deployment  
 
• Distributed  Training  
 
• Mobile  Deployment  (Experimental)  
 
• Robust  Ecosystem  

20  5.3. Libraries  used  
 
5.3.1 Numpy  
 
Numpy serves as a versatile array -processing library, offering a powerful  
multidimensional array structure and a range of tools for manipulating these  arrays. This 
essential package forms the backbone of scientific computing in  Python,  enabling  efficient  
handling  of multidimensional  data.  Additionally,  Numpy  facilitates  the creation  of custom  data 
types,  enabling  seamless  integration  with diverse  databases.  
5.3.2 Pandas  
Pandas,  an open -source  Python  library,  offers  a robust  set of tools  for high- performance 
data manipulation and analysis through its advanced data structures.  While Python traditionally 
focused on data preparation and cleansing, Pandas  revolutionized data analysis by providing a 
comprehensive solution. With Pandas,  users  can seamlessly  execute  five key data processing  
and analysis  steps —loading,  preparing, manipulating, modeling, and analyzing data —
regardless of its source.  Python combined with Pandas finds extensive applications across 
various sectors  such as academia,  finance, economics,  statistics, analytics,  and more.  
5.3.3 Scikit -learn  
 
Scikit -learn  offers  a variety  of supervised  and unsupervised  learning  algorithms through 
a uniform interface in Python. Licensed under a permissive  simplified  BSD  license,  it is widely  
available  across  numerous  Linux  distributions,  promoting  its adoption  in both  academic  and 
commercial settings.  
5.3.4 MatPlotLib  
 
Matplotlib functions as a foundational graph plotting library in Python,  offering a 
versatile visualization tool for generating a wide array of plots and  charts. Developed by John 
D. Hunter, Matplotlib is an open -source resource  accessible  to all users.  While  primarily  
implemented  in Python,  Matplotlib  incorporates elements of C, Objective -C, and JavaScript to 
ensure compatibility  across  different platforms.  
21  5.4. Technologies  used  
 
5.4.1 Vision  Transformers  
 
A Vision Transformer (ViT) is a model designed for image classification  tasks,  
revolutionizing  traditional  computer  vision.  Unlike  conventional  convolutional neural networks 
(CNNs), which operate on fixed -size image grids,  ViTs  break  down  an input  image  into smaller  
patches.  Each  patch  is serialized  into a vector and mapped to a lower dimension using a single 
matrix multiplication.  Inspired by the success of Transformers in natural language processing, 
ViTs have  shown remarkable promise in various computer vision tasks, including image  
classification. These models employ a Transformer -like architecture over image  patches, 
making them a powerful alternative for visual recognition tasks. The key  concepts include 
“attention” and “multi -head attention,” which play a crucial role  in how vision transformers 
work. By enhancing relevant parts of the image while  mimicking  cognitive  attention,  ViTs learn  
to focus on important  input features.  
A few key features  of Vision  Transformers  are: 
 
• Efficiency  
 
• Robust  Feature  Extraction  
 
• Task -Specific  Adaptability  
 
• Interpretable  Attention Maps  
 
• Transfer  Learning  
 
• Spatial  Hierarchies  
 
• Positional  Encodings  
 
• Hybrid  Architectures  
22  5.4.2 DIBCO  Dataset  
 
The DIBCO  (Document  Image  Binarization  Contest)  dataset  is an international  
competition focused on document image binarization. It has been organized in  conjunction  with 
the ICDAR  (International  Conference  on Document  Analysis  and Recognition) conferences. 
The primary objective of this contest is to identify  advancements  in binarization  techniques  for 
both machine -printed  and handwritten  document  images.  Participants  evaluate  their methods  
using  performance  measures  aligned with document image analysis and recognition 
requirements. Over the  years,  DIBCO  has seen different  variants,  including  H-DIBCO  (focused  
on handwritten documents). Researchers have tackled challenges related to noise,  varying 
lighting conditions, and diverse document types. Binarization is a key  preprocessing  step for 
optical  character  recognition  (OCR),  and document  indexing.  The DIBCO  dataset  contributes  
to advancements  in these  areas.  For those  interested in exploring the dataset and participating in 
the contest, DIBCO offers a  valuable  resource for  advancing  document image  binarization  
techniques.  
23  6. CODING  
 
• main.py:  
 
from typing import Any  from thinc import config  import  torch  
from  vit_pytorch  import  ViT 
 
from models.binae import BINMODEL  import torchvision.transforms as transforms  import 
numpy as np  
import torch.optim as optim  from einops import rearrange  import loadData2 as loadData  
import utils  as utils  
from  config import Configs  import os  
import cv2  import  glob 
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt  import matplotlib.image as mpimg  cfg = Configs().parse()  
FLIPPED = False  THRESHOLD  = 0.5 
SPLITSIZE = cfg.split_size  SETTING  = cfg.vit_model_size  
TPS = cfg.vit_patch_size  
batch_size  = cfg.batch_size  
 
experiment = SETTING +'_'+ str(SPLITSIZE)+'_' + str(TPS)  patch_size  = TPS 
image_size =  (SPLITSIZE,SPLITSIZE)  MASKINGRATIO = 0.5  VIS_RESULTS  = True  
TEST_DIBCO  = cfg.testing_dataset  
 
device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')  count_psnr  = 
utils.count_psnr  
imvisualize = utils.imvisualize  load_data_func = loadData.loadData_sets  if SETTING  == 
'base':  
ENCODERLAYERS =  6 
 
ENCODERHEADS  = 8 
 
ENCODERDIM  = 768 
 
if SETTING == 'small':  ENCODERLAYERS  = 3 
ENCODERHEADS  = 4 
 
24  ENCODERDIM  = 512 
 
if SETTING == 'large':  ENCODERLAYERS  = 12 
ENCODERHEADS  = 16 
 
ENCODERDIM  = 1024  
 
best_psnr  = 0 
 
best_epoch  = 0 
def sort_batch(batch):  n_batch = len(batch)  train_index = []  train_in = []  train_out  = [] 
for i in range(n_batch):  
 
idx, img, gt_img = batch[i]  train_index.append(idx)  train_in.append(img)  
train_out.append(gt_img)  
train_index  = np.array(train_index)  
 
train_in = np.array(train_in, dtype='float32')  train_out = np.array(train_out, dtype='float32')  
train_in = torch.from_numpy(train_in)  train_out = torch.from_numpy(train_out)  return  
train_index, train_in, train_out  
def test_data_loader():  
 
_, _, data_test  = load_data_func(flipped=FLIPPED)  
 
test_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(data_test, collate_fn=sort_batch,  
batch_size=batch_size,  shuffle=False,  num_workers=2,  pin_memory=True)  
return  test_loader  test_loader = test_data_loader()  v = ViT(  
image_size = image_size,  patch_size  = patch_size,  
num_classes = 1000,  dim = ENCODERDIM,  
depth = ENCODERLAYERS,  heads  = ENCODERHEADS,  
mlp_dim =  2048  
 
) 
 
model = BINMODEL(  encoder =  v, 
25  masking_ratio  = MASKINGRATIO,  # doesnt matter for binarization  decoder_dim  
= ENCODERDIM,  
decoder_depth = ENCODERLAYERS,  decoder_heads =  ENCODERHEADS  
) 
 
model  = model.to(device)  
 
optimizer = optim.AdamW(model.parameters(),lr=1.5e -4, betas=(0.9, 0.95), eps=1e - 08, 
weight_decay=0.05,  amsgrad=False)  
def visualize(epoch):  losses  = 0 
for i, (test_index, test_in, test_out) in enumerate(test_loader):  # inputs, labels = data  
bs = len(test_in)  
 
inputs = test_in.to(device)  outputs = test_out.to(device)  with torch.no_grad():  
loss,_,  pred_pixel_values =  model(inputs,outputs)  
rec_patches  = pred_pixel_values  
 
rec_images = rearrange(rec_patches, 'b (h w) (p1 p2 c) -> b c (h p1) (w p2)',  p1 = patch_size, 
p2 = patch_size,  h=image_size[0]//patch_size)  
for j in range  (0,bs):  
 
imvisualize(inputs[j].cpu(),outputs[j].cpu(),rec_images[j].cpu(),test_index[j],epoch,e  
xperiment)  
losses  += loss.item()  
 
print('valid loss: ', losses / len(test_loader))  def valid_model(epoch):  
  
26  # Create  figure  
 
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(28,  14)) 
 
# setting  values  to rows  and column  variables  count=0  
psnr = count_psnr(epoch,valid_data=TEST_DIBCO,setting=experiment,flipped=FLIPPED  , 
thresh=THRESHOLD)  
print('Test  PSNR:  ', psnr)  
 
#test_images_path=  
'C:/Users/Ravinder/Desktop/DocEnTR/DIBCOSETS/'+TEST_DIBCO+'/imgs'  
#print('Test  Images:',  test_images_path)  
 
#output_images_path=  
'C:/Users/Ravinder/Desktop/DocEnTR/visbase_256_8/epoch_testing/00_reconstr_no  rmal'  
#print('Output  Images:',  output_images_path)  
 
for img in  
glob.glob("C:/Users/Ravinder/Desktop/DocEnTR/visbase_256_8/epoch_testing/00_r  
econstr_normal/*.png"):  
cv_img = cv2.imread(img)  B,G,R  = cv_img[100,100]  
result= int(B)+int(G)+int(R)  if result>0:  
count=count+1  #print(count)  
for x in range(count):  
name=str(x+1)  inputimgadd  = 
'C:/Users/Ravinder/Desktop/DocEnTR/DIBCOSETS/'+TEST_DIBCO+'/imgs/'+nam  e+'.png'  
inputimage  = cv2.imread(inputimgadd)  
 
outputimgadd =  
'C:/Users/Ravinder/Desktop/DocEnTR/visbase_256_8/epoch_testing/00_reconstr_no  
rmal/'+name+'.png'  
 
 
27  outputimage = cv2.imread(outputimgadd)  plt.subplot(1, 2, 1)  
plt.axis('off')  
 
plt.title("INPUT Image -"+name)  plt.imshow(inputimage)  plt.subplot(1, 2, 2)  
plt.axis('off')  
 
plt.title("OUTPUT Image -"+name)  plt.imshow(outputimage)  plt.show()  
model_name  = 'C:/Users/Ravinder/Desktop/DocEnTR/weights/train_model.pt'  
model.load_state_dict(torch.load(model_name,map_location ='cpu'))  epoch  = "_testing"  
valid_model(epoch)  
 
• requirements.txt:   
einops==0.3.2  matplotlib==3.5.0  
numpy==1.21.5  opencv_python==4.5.4.60  Pillow==9.0.0  thinc==8.0.13  torch==1.10.0  
torchvision==0.11.1  tqdm==4.62.3  vit_pytorch==0.24.3  
 
• config.py:  
import argparse  class  Configs  (): 
def  init (self):  #C:/Users/Ravinder/Desktop/DocEnTR/data/  self.parser  = 
argparse.ArgumentParser()  
self.parser.add_argument(' --data_path',  type=str,  
default='C:/Users/Ravinder/Desktop/DocEnTR/data/', help='specify your data path,  better  
ending with the "/" ')  
self.parser.add_argument(' --split_size', type=int, default=256, help= "better be  a multiple of  8, 
like 128, 256, etc ..")  
self.parser.add_argument(' --vit_patch_size',  type=int,  default=16  , help="  better  be a multiple of  
2 like  8, 16 etc ..")  
self.parser.add_argument(' --vit_model_size',        type=str,         default='base',  
choices=['small',  'base',  'large'])  
self.parser.add_argument(' --testing_dataset', type=str, default='2018')   
 
 
28  self.parser.add_argument(' --validation_dataset', type=str, default='2016')  
self.parser.add_argument(' --batch_size', type=int, default=8)  self.parser.add_argument(' --
epochs',  type=int,  default=151,  help=  'the desired  
training  epochs')  
self.parser.add_argument(' --model_weights_path',  type=str,  help=  'the desired  trained  model')  
def parse(self):  
return  self.parser.parse_args()  
29  7. SYSTEM  TEST  
 
7.1 Basics  of Software  Testing  
 
Software  testing  is a vital step in the software  development  cycle.  It ensures  that the 
software meets  its requirements  and functions  as expected.  
Software  testing  can be categorized  into two essential  steps:  
 
1. Verification : This step ensures that the software correctly implements a  specific function. 
It answers the question, “Are we building the product,  right?”  
2. Validation : In contrast,  validation  ensures  that the software  aligns  with customer  
requirements. It addresses the question, “Are we building  the right product?”  
7.1.1 Types  of Software  Testing  
 
1. Black  Box Testing : Black  box testing  is a software  testing  technique  that focusses  on a 
system's functional  requirements  without  exploring  into its internal mechanisms. Testers do not 
require knowledge of the system's  internal structure; their main goal is to validate functionality 
based on  specified requirements. This method, also known as specification -based  testing,  
assesses  an application's  functionality  without  inspecting  its internal workings. Testers focus on 
input and output validation rather  than the source  code.  
Types  of Black  Box Testing:  
 
1. Functional Testing: Ensures that every function within the  software application operates 
in position with the specified  requirements  and standards  by validating  user interfaces,  APIs,  
databases,  security measures,  and other components.  
2. Regression Testing: Verifies that changes made to the code  do not introduce  fresh  errors  
and confirms  compatibility  between  the existing code  and any new additions.  
3. Non-functional  Testing  (NFT):  Checks  non-functional  aspects  like performance,  
usability, and  scalability.  
30  Advantages  of Black Box  Testing:  
 
• Independence  
 
• Focus  on User  Perspective  
 
• Effective  for Validation  
 
 
2. White Box Testing : White box testing, also referred to as clear box  testing,  glass  box 
testing,  or structural  testing,  is  a software  testing  approach that entails scrutinizing the 
internal structure, design, and code  of a software  application.  In contrast  to black  box testing,  
where  functionality is tested without insight into internal operations, white box  testing grants 
testers access to the source code to create test cases for  validating software accuracy at the code 
level. Testers in white box  testing  have  visibility  into the application's  source  code,  enabling  
them  to design comprehensive test cases that thoroughly evaluate the software  from  within.  
Techniques  for White  Box Testing:  
1. Statement Coverage: Ensures that each line of code is executed  at least once.  
2. Branch  Coverage: Tests  all branches from  decision  points.  
3. Condition  Coverage:  Covers  all individual  conditions  within  code.  
4. Multiple  Condition  Coverage:  Tests  all possible  combinations  of condition  outcomes.  
5. Basis  Path  Testing:  Constructs  control  flow graphs  and calculates  Cyclomatic complexity 
to design minimal test cases for independent  paths.  
Advantages  of White  Box Testing:  
• Early  issue  detection.  
• Thorough  code coverage.  
31   
 
 
Fig. 7.1 Black  Box and White  Box Testing  

32  7.1.2 Levels  of Software  Testing  
 
There  are 4 different  levels  of testing.  They  are Unit Testing,  Integration  Testing,  System 
Testing,  and Acceptance  Testing.  
1. Unit  Testing  
 
Unit testing serves as the initial level of software testing. Its  purpose  is to verify  whether  
software  modules  meet  the specified  requirements. It focuses on individual components or units 
of a software  application. These units can be functions, methods, or other small parts  of the 
code. Unit testing is also the first level of functional testing. It  ensures  that each unit performs  
as intended.  A unit component  represents  the smallest  testable part  of the software.  It could  be 
an individual  function  or a specific  regulation  within  the application.  The primary  goal of unit 
testing  is to validate  the correctness  of these  isolated  code  units.  
 
 
Fig. 7.2 Levels  of Software  Testing  
 
2. Integration  Testing  
 
Integration Testing is a crucial step in the software testing process.  Integration testing 
occurs after unit testing and focuses on verifying the  interactions and data exchange between 
different components or modules  of a software application. The primary goal of integration 
testing is to  expose  faults  in the interaction  between  integrated  units.  When  each component  
or module  works  independently,  integration  testing  checks the  data flow between dependent 
modules. It is performed once functional  testing  has successfully  validated  each application  
module.  It evaluates  the accuracy  of communication among all the  modules.  
 

33  3. System  Testing  
 
System Testing represents the third level of software testing.  System testing involves 
evaluating the entire software system. It verifies  both functional and non -functional 
requirements. In system testing, we  assess the application’s end -to-end flow, simulating how a 
user interacts  with the software.  The testing  environment  closely  resembles  the production  
environment.  It navigates  through  all necessary  modules  of an application, ensuring that end 
features and business processes function  correctly. It examines the complete working of an 
integrated software  system  against specified  requirements.  
4. Acceptance  Testing  
 
Acceptance  Testing  represents  the fourth  and final level  of software  testing. Acceptance 
testing evaluates whether the software conforms to  specified  requirements  and meets  user 
expectations.  Even  after unit testing, integration testing, and system testing, minor errors may 
surface  when  the system  is used by end-users  in real-world  scenarios.  User  Acceptance  Testing  
(UAT),  acceptance  testing  is performed  by the customer  before  accepting  the final product.  UAT  
concentrates  on features  and scenarios regularly  used by customers  or end -users.  
7.2 Functional  and Non-Functional  Testing  
 
 
 
Fig. 7.3 Functional  and Non-Functional  Testing  
  

34   
7.2.1 Functional  Testing  
 
Functional testing is a software testing approach that evaluates whether a  system adheres 
to its functional requirements and specifications. It ensures that  the application satisfies the 
specified requirements. This type of testing focuses  on the system’s  behavior  during  processing,  
simulating  real-world  usage  scenarios.  Unlike  non-functional  testing,  it does not delve  into 
system  architecture  assumptions  or source  code.  Each  function  of the software  application  is 
tested  by providing  relevant  input,  comparing  the actual  output  with the expected  output.  
7.2.2 Non-Functional  Testing  
 
Non-functional testing verifies aspects of a software application beyond  its functional  
requirements.  It examines  whether  the system  behaves  as expected  in terms of non -functional 
parameters. Non -functional testing covers areas not  addressed by functional testing. Parameters 
such as performance, scalability,  security,  and usability  fall under  non-functional testing.  
Ensuring  non-functional  readiness  is equally  crucial  as functional  testing  for a robust  system.  
35  8. OUTPUT  SCREENS  
 
 
 
Fig. 8.1 Enhanced  image  1 
 
 
 
Fig. 8.2 Enhanced  image  2 

36   
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8.3 Enhanced  image  3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8.4 Enhanced  image  4 

37   
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8.5 Enhanced  image  5 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8.6 Enhanced  image  6 

38  9. CONCLUSION  
The study  of Document  Image  Enhancement  using  Vision  Transformers  introduces  an 
innovative transformer -based architecture designed for enhancing document images.  This 
architecture  leverages  self-attention  mechanisms  too capture  extensive  global  dependencies 
hence enhancing the performance. To the best of our knowledge, this is the  first pure 
transformer model addressing DIE related problems. The model captures high  level global long -
range dependencies using the self -attention mechanism for a better  performance. Quantitative 
and qualitative results on the DIBCO benchmarks prove the  effectiveness  of this project  in 
recovering  highly  degraded  document  images.  It is a simple  and flexible  framework  that can also 
be easily  applied  to enhance  other  kinds  of degradation  occurring  in document  images  (like 
blur, shadow,  warps,  stains etc).  
39  10. FUTURE  ENHANCEMENTS  
 
Some of the new aspects will be investigated in a future work. We also wish to  investigate 
a self -supervised learning stage that can substantially benefit from large  amounts  of unlabelled  
data.  We can also optimize  the computational  efficiency  of vision  transformers to reduce training 
and inference time, making the process cost effective  and more  scalable.  
40 
 11. REFERENCE  
 
[1]. B. Megyesi, N. Blomqvist, and E. Pettersson, “The decode database: Collection of  historical 
ciphers and keys,” in the 2nd International Conference on Historical  Cryptology,  HistoCrypt  2019, June  
23-26 2019,  Mons, Belgium,  2019,  pp. 69 –78. 
[2]. S. Kang, B. K. Iwana, and S. Uchida, “Complex image processing with less data  document 
image binarization by integrating multiple pretrained u -net modules,” Pattern  Recognition,  vol. 109, p. 
107577, 2021.  
[3]. S. K. Jemni, M. A. Souibgui, Y. Kessentini, and A. Fornes, “Enhance to read better: A  multi -task 
adversarial network for handwritten document image enhancement,” Pattern  Recognition,  vol. 123, p. 
108370, 2022.  
[4]. M. Hradis, J. Kotera, P. Zemcık, and F. ˇ Sroubek, “Convolutional neural ˇ networks for  direct  text 
deblurring,” in  Proceedings of BMVC,  vol. 10, no.  2, 2015.  
[5]. B. Wang and C. L. P. Chen, “An effective background estimation method for shadows  removal 
of document images,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Image  Processing  (ICIP), 2019, pp. 
3611 –3615.  
[6]. M. A. Souibgui and Y. Kessentini, “De -gan: A conditional generative adversarial network  for 
document enhancement,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine  Intelligence,  2020.  
[7]. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I.  
Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in neural information processing  systems,  2017, 
pp. 5998 –6008.  
[8]. J. Devlin, M. -W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre -training of deep  bidirectional 
transformers for language understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805,  2018  
[9]. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M.  Dehghani, 
M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An image  is worth 16x16 words: 
Transformers for image recognition at scale,” in International  Conference  on Learning Representations,  
2021.  
[10].  N. Carion,  F. Massa,  G. Synnaeve,  N. Usunier,  A. Kirillov,  and S. Zagoruyko,  “End -to- end object 
detection with transformers,” in European Conference on Computer Vision.  Springer,  2020, pp. 213 – 
229. 
[11].  F. Biten,  R. Litman, Y.  Xie, S. Appalaraju,  and R. Manmatha,  “Latr:  Layout -aware  transformer  for 
scene -text vqa,”  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2112.12494,  2021  
[12].  C. Rouhou,  M. Dhiaf,  Y. Kessentini,  and S.  B. Salem,  “Transformerbased  approach  for joint 
handwriting and named entity recognition in historical document,” Pattern  Recognition  Letters, 2021.  
[13].  V. De Bortoli,  A. Desolneux, B.  Galerne,  and A. Leclaire,  “Patch  redundancy  in images:  A 
statistical testing framework and some applications,” SIAM Journal on Imaging  Sciences,  vol. 12, no. 2, 
41 
 pp. 893–926, 2019.  
[14].  P. Vincent, H.  Larochelle,  Y. Bengio,  and P.-A. Manzagol,  “Extracting and  composing  robust 
features with denoising autoencoders,” in Proceedings of the 25th international  conference on  Machine 
learning, 2008, pp.  1096 –1103.  
[15].  N. Otsu, “A threshold selection method from gray -level histograms,” IEEE transactions  on 
systems,  man,  and cybernetics, vol.  9, no. 1,  pp. 62 –66, 1979.  
[16].  J. Sauvola  and M. Pietikainen,  “Adaptive  document  image  binarization,”  ¨ Pattern  recognition,  vol. 
33, no. 2,  pp. 225 –236, 2000.  
[17].  [W. Xiong, J. Xu, Z. Xiong, J. Wang, and M. Liu, “Degraded historical document image  binarization 
using local features and support vector machine (svm),” Optik, vol. 164, pp.  218–223, 2018.  
[18].  R. Hedjam, M. Cheriet, and M. Kalacska, “Constrained energy maximization and self - referencing 
method for invisible ink detection from multispectral historical document  images,” in 2014 22nd 
International Conference on Pattern Recognition. IEEE, 2014, pp.  3026 –3031.  
[19].  Pratikakis, K. Zagoris, G. Barlas, B. Gatos, “Icdar 2017 competition on document image  binarization 
(dibco 2017),” in 2017 International Conference on Document Analysis and  Recognition.  IEEE, 2017,  pp. 
1395 —-1403.  
[20].  M. Z. Afzal,  J. Pastor -Pellicer,  F. Shafait,  T. M. Breuel,  A. Dengel,  and M. Liwicki,  “Document 
image binarization using lstm: A sequence learning approach,” in  Proceedings of the 3rd international 
workshop on historical document imaging and  processing, 2015, pp.  79–84. 
[21].  X.-J. Mao, C. Shen, and Y. -B. Yang, “Image restoration using very deep convolutional  encoder -
decoder networks with symmetric skip connections,” in Proceedings of the 30th  International 
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016, pp. 2810 – 2818.  
[22].  K. G. Lore,  A. Akintayo,  and S.  Sarkar,  “Llnet: A  deep  autoencoder  approach  to natural  low-light 
image  enhancement,”  Pattern  Recognition,  vol. 61,  pp. 650–662, 2017.  
[23].  J. Calvo -Zaragoza  and A.-J. Gallego,  “A selectional  auto-encoder approach  for document  image  
binarization,” Pattern Recognition,  vol. 86, pp.  37–47, 2019.  
[24].  Y. Akbari,  S. Al-Maadeed,  and K. Adam,  “Binarization  of degraded  document images  using 
convolutional neural networks and waveletbased multichannel images,” IEEE  Access,  vol. 8, pp.  153 
517–153 534,  2020.  
[25].  Tensmeyer and T. Martinez, “Document image binarization with fully convolutional  neural  
networks,”  in 2017  14th IAPR  international  conference  on document analysis  and 
recognition  (ICDAR), vol.  1. IEEE,  2017, pp. 99 –104. 
[26].  O. Ronneberger,  P. Fischer,  and T. Brox,  “U-net: Convolutional networks  for biomedical  image 
segmentation,” in International Conference on Medical image computing and  computer -assisted  
intervention. Springer,  2015, pp. 234 –241. 
 
42 
 [27].  J. Zhao, C. Shi, F. Jia, Y. Wang, and B. Xiao, “Document image binarization with  cascaded 
generators of conditional generative adversarial networks,” Pattern Recognition,  vol. 96,  p. 106968, 
2019.  
[28].  K. Bhunia,  A. K. Bhunia,  A. Sain,  and P.  P. Roy,  “Improving  document  binarization  via adversarial 
noise -texture  augmentation,”  in 2019  
[29].  M. O. Tamrin,  M. El -Amine  Ech-Cherif,  and M. Cheriet,  “A twostage  unsupervised  deep  learning 
framework for degradation removal in ancient documents,” in Pattern  Recognition. ICPR International 
Workshops and Challenges. Springer International  Publishing,  2021, pp. 292 –303. 
[30].  M. A. Souibgui, Y. Kessentini, and A. Fornes, “A conditional gan  based approach for  distorted 
camera captured documents recovery,” in Mediterranean Conference on Pattern  Recognition  and 
Artificial  Intelligence. Springer,  2020.  
 
ISSN:2366-1313
1158DOCUMENTIMAGEENHANCEMENTUSINGVISION
TRANSFORMERS
1Dr.Ch.V.PhaniKrishna,2VedashriVitthalGore,3SabavatSwapna,4PonnalaPranay
1Professor,Dept.ofCSE,TeegalaKrishnaReddyEngineeringCollege,Meerpet,Hyderabad,
hodcse@tkrec.ac.in
2,3,4,BTechStudent,Dept.ofCSE,TeegalaKrishnaReddyEngineeringCollege,Meerpet,Hyderabad
vedashrigore2020@gmail.com,sabavatswapna123@gmail.com,pranayponnala846@gmail.com
ABSTRACT:
Documentimagescanundergonumerousdegradationscenarios,causingdifficultiesin
recognitionandprocessing.Inthedigitalera,itiscrucialtoremovenoisefromtheseimages
toensuretheirproperutilization.Totacklethisissue,anewencoder-decoderarchitecture
basedonvisiontransformershasbeendevelopedtoimprovebothmachine-printedand
handwrittendocumentimagesseamlessly.Theencoderworksdirectlyonpixelpatchesalong
withtheirpositionaldata,eliminatingtheneedforconvolutionallayers,andthedecoder
recreatesacleanimagefromtheencodedpatches.Experimentalresultsindicatethe
superiorityofthismodeloverexistingmethodsonvariousDIBCObenchmarks.
Keywords:Degradedimages,Encoder-DecoderArchitecture,DIBCO
IINTRODUCTION
Preservingthelegibilityandqualityof
documentimages,especiallyhistorical
ones,isacriticalfocuswithinDocument
ImageAnalysisandRecognition(DIAR)
research.Historicaldocumentsoftenhold
valuableinformationspanningcenturies
anddecades.However,thesedocuments
aresusceptibletovariousformsofdegradationsuchassmears,stains,pen
strokes,andunevenillumination,which
canhindertheirpreservation.
Thepresenceofsuchdistortionscan
significantlyimpactdownstreamtasksin
informationprocessing,including
segmentation,OpticalCharacter
Recognition(OCR),informationspotting,
andlayoutanalysis.Toaddressthese
challenges,arobustpre-processingstepis
ISSN:2366-1313
VolumeIXIssueIAPRIL2024www.zkginternational.com 1159essentialtodenoiseandreconstruct
degradedimagesintohigh-quality,clean
versions.DocumentImageEnhancement
(DIE)playsacrucialroleinrestoringthe
qualityofdegradeddocumentsamplesto
produceclear,uniformimages.
RecentadvancementsinConvolutional
NeuralNetwork(CNN)-basedapproaches
haverevolutionizedDIEtaskssuchas
binarization,deblurring,shadowremoval,
andwatermarkremoval.WhileCNNs
haveshownimprovedperformanceover
traditionalmethods,theyhavelimitations.
CNNsmaynotbeoptimalforrestoring
differentregionsofadocumentimagedue
totheirgrid-basedoperationandlimited
abilitytocapturelong-rangedependencies.
Inresponsetotheselimitations,Vision
Transformers(ViTs)haveemergedasa
promisingalternative.ViTssplitimages
intofixed-sizepatches,enablingthe
captureofbothlocalandglobalspatial
dependencies.Byleveragingtheself-
attentionmechanisminspiredby
transformersinNaturalLanguage
Processing(NLP),ViTsexcelatcapturing
globalinteractionsandcontextualfeatures
inimages.
OurproposedDocumentImage
EnhancementusingVisionTransformer
leveragesViTsinanencoder-decoder
framework,eliminatingtheneedforCNNs.
Thisaimstorestoreandenhancedegradeddocumentimagesefficiently.By
incorporatingViTsandself-attention
mechanisms,itcanrecovermissingor
degradedpatchesbyreasoningglobally
betweenneighbouringpatches.
Theinnovativeapproachofthisproject
introducesatransformer-basedmodelfor
document image enhancement,
showcasingthepowerofViTs.
II.LITERATURESURVEY
1.TransformersinVision:ASurvey-
arXiv
ItdiscussesimagerestorationTransformer
modelsforvarioustaskslikeimagesuper-
resolution,imageenhancement,and
colorization.Itcomparesadvantagesand
limitationsofpopulartechniquesin
computervision.Ithighlightsthe
applicationsoftransformersinimage
processingtasksandprovidesinsightsinto
futureresearchdirections.
2.AnOverviewofVisionTransformers
forImageProcessing:ASurvey-
IJACSA
Itfocusesonthesuccessofvision
transformer-basedmodelsinartificial
intelligence,particularlyincomputer
vision.Itemphasizesthepotential
applicationsofvisiontransformersfor
studentverificationinuniversitysystems.
Itdiscussestheimportanceofaccurately
ISSN:2366-1313
VolumeIXIssueIAPRIL2024www.zkginternational.com 1160verifyingstudentidentitiesforacademic
successinonlinelearningenvironments.
3.ASurveyonVisualTransformer-
arXiv
Itprovidesacompleteoverviewof
transformer-basedmodelsincomputer
vision,coveringobjectdetection,image
classification,andvideoprocessing.It
discussestheapplicationsoftransformers
inhigh/mid-levelvision,low-levelvision,
andvideoprocessingtasks.Ithighlights
theperformanceoftransformermodelsin
variousvisualtasksandtheirpotentialfor
improvingawiderangeofvisual
applications.
4.VisionTransformersinImage
Restoration:ASurvey-MDPI
ItsurveystheimpactofVision
Transformersinimagerestorationtasks
likeimagesuper-resolution,denoising,and
deblurring.Itcomparestheefficiency
metricsofViT-basedmodelsondifferent
benchmarksanddatasetsforimage
restoration.Itdiscussesthechallengesand
futureworkinusingVisionTransformers
forimagerestorationtasks.
IIISYSTEMANALYSIS
EXISTINGSYSTEM
Theliteraturesuggestsusing
ConvolutionalNeuralNetworkstopredictandclassifyfourtypesofskinlesions.A
websiteiscreatedforreal-timeuseofthe
model,whichpredictsthethreemost
commoncategoriesofskinlesionsfora
certainimages.Theexperimentwas
conductedusingtheMNIST:HAM10000
dataset,whichincludes100,000annotated
images.Anotherresearcherdevelopedan
algorithmtodetectskinlesionsearlyby
extractingfeaturesusingtheABCDrule,
GLCM,andHOG.Preprocessingisused
toimproveskinlesionsqualityandclarity
areusedtoreduceartifactssuchasskin
color,hair,andsoon.GeodesicActive
Contour(GAC)wasusedtosegmentthe
lesion,allowingfordistinctfeature
extraction.TheABCDscoringsystemwas
utilizedtoextractattributeslikesymmetry,
border,color,anddiameter.HOGand
GLCMwereusedtoextracttextural
information.Theretrievedfeaturesare
usedtocategorizeskinlesionsasbenignor
melanomausingmachinelearning
algorithmsincludingSVM,KNN,and
NaïveBayes.Theprojectutilizedskin
lesionimagesfromtheInternationalSkin
imagingCollaboration,including328
benignimagesand672melanomaimages.
LimitationsofExistingsystem
1.Grid-BasedOperation
2.LimitedCaptureofHigh-Level
Dependencies
ISSN:2366-1313
VolumeIXIssueIAPRIL2024www.zkginternational.com 11613.Task-SpecificFilters
4.LessEffectiveforLong-Range
Dependencies
PROPOSEDSYSTEM
Inthisproposedsystem,asimple
DocumentImage Enhancement
Transformerisused.Itisanend-to-end
approachthateffectivelyrestoresand
improvesdegradeddocumentimages.It
utilizesVisionTransformersinan
encoder-decoderframework.Document
ImageBinarizationCompetition(DIBCO)
showsthatthisachievesstate-of-the-art
resultsforbothmachine-printedand
handwrittendegradeddocumentimages
ProposedsystemAdvantages:
1.Transformer-BasedArchitecture
2.Encoder-DecoderFramework
3.FlexibilityandSimplicity
IVIMPLEMENTATION
Architecture:
Fig-1.Architecturesofthesystemmodel
1.SystemArchitecture
Theproposedsystemarchitectureconsists
oftheencoder-decoderframeworkwhich
worksonthebasisofVisionTransformers.
InputImage:DegradedImageistakenas
ainput,itcanbehandwrittenorprinted.
ImagePatches:Theinputimageis
dividedintosmallerpixelpatches;each
patchcontainsasubsetofpixelsfromthe
originalimage.
FlattenedPixelPatches:Thepatchesare
thendividedintoaflattenedpixelpatch
whichrepresentsthedatainone-
dimensionalformat,makingtheprocess
furthereasy.
ISSN:2366-1313
VolumeIXIssueIAPRIL2024www.zkginternational.com 1162TransformerEncoder:Thisusesthe
VisionTransformersarchitectureand
encodesthedatafromtheflattenedpixel
patchesusingthepositionalinformation.
TransformerDecoder:Thisdecodesthe
encodeddatabyreconstructingmeaningful
patterns,andusestheself-attention
mechanismsforcontext-awaredecoding.
CombinedPixelPatches:Thedecoded
dataisconstructedintothecombinedpixel
patchwhichrepresentsthesegmentsofthe
enhancedimage.
EnhancedOutput:Thisassemblesallthe
combinedpixelpatchestoformacomplete
enhancedimagebyimprovedquality,
visualappeal,colourcorrectionorother
features.
2.Modules
Inthispaper,thereare2modulesbasedon
thearchitectureofVisionTransformers.
2.1Encoder
Theinitialstepinvolvespartitioningan
imageintoacollectionofpatches.These
patchesarethentransformedintotokens,
incorporatingtheirpositionaldata.
Subsequently,aseriesoftransformer
blocksisutilizedtoconvertthesetokens
intotheencodedlatentrepresentation.
Theseblocksadheretoastructuresimilar
to,comprisinglayersofmulti-headedself-attentionandmulti-layeredperceptron
(MLP).Eachblockisprefacedbya
LayerNorm(LN)andsucceededbya
residualconnection.Thedimensionsofthe
patches'embeddingandthequantityof
transformerblocksaredeterminedbased
onthemodel'ssize.
Initialencodingstagedividesimageinto
patches
Patchesembeddedtocreatetokenswith
positionalinformation
Transformerblocksusedtomaptokens
intoencodedlatentrepresentation
Blocksfollowstructuredescribedin
reference:multi-headedself-attentionand
multi-layeredperceptronlayers
2.2.Decoder
Thedecodersegmentcomprisesa
sequenceoftransformerblocks(equivalent
innumbertotheencoderblocks)that
receivetheoutputtedtokensfromthe
encoderasinput.Thesetokensprogress
throughthetransformerdecoderblocks
andarethenprojectedusingalinearlayer
togeneratethedesiredpixelvalues.This
configurationensuresthateachoutput
elementcorrespondstoavector
representingaflattenedpatchinthe
resultantimage.Groundtruthpixelvalues
arederivedbysegmentingthegroundtruth
ISSN:2366-1313
VolumeIXIssueIAPRIL2024www.zkginternational.com 1163(GT)cleanimageintopatches(following
thesameapproachaswiththeinput
degradedimage)andflatteningtheminto
vectors.Trainingthemodelinvolves
utilizingameansquarederror(MSE)loss
functiontocomparethemodel'soutput
withtheGTpixelpatches.
Decodercomponentconsistsof
transformerblocks,matchingencoder's
number
Takesencoder'stokensequenceasinput
Tokensprocessedwithintransformer
decoderblocks
Projectedusinglinearlayertogetpixel
values
Eachoutputelementrepresentsflattened
patchinresultingimage
VRESULTANDDISCUSSION
Enhancedimage1:
Enhancedimage
2:

ISSN:2366-1313
VolumeIXIssueIAPRIL2024www.zkginternational.com 1164Enhancedimage
3:
Enhancedimage
4:
Enhancedimage
5:
Enhancedimage6:
VICONCLUSION
ThestudyofDocumentImage
EnhancementusingVisionTransformers
introducesaninnovativetransformer-
basedarchitecturedesignedforenhancing
documentimages.Thisarchitecture
leveragesself-attentionmechanismsto
captureextensiveglobaldependencies
henceenhancingtheperformance.Tothe
bestofourknowledge,thisisthefirstpure
transformermodeladdressingDIErelated
problems.Themodelcaptureshighlevel
globallong-rangedependenciesusingthe
self-attentionmechanismforabetter
performance.Quantitativeandqualitative
resultsontheDIBCObenchmarksprove
theeffectivenessofthisprojectin
recoveringhighlydegradeddocument
images.Itisasimpleandflexible
frameworkthatcanalsobeeasilyapplied
toenhanceotherkindsofdegradation
occurringindocumentimages(likeblur,
shadow,warps,stainsetc.).
ISSN:2366-1313
VolumeIXIssueIAPRIL2024www.zkginternational.com 1165FUTUREENHANCEMENTS
Someofthenewaspectswillbe
investigatedinafuturework.Wealso
wishtoinvestigateaself-supervised
learningstagethatcansubstantiallybenefit
fromlargeamountsofunlabelleddata.We
canalsooptimizethecomputational
efficiencyofvisiontransformerstoreduce
trainingandinferencetime,makingthe
processcosteffectiveandmorescalable.
VIIREFERENCES
[1].B.Megyesi,N.Blomqvist,andE.Pettersson,“Thedecodedatabase:Collectionofhistoricalciphersandkeys,”inthe2ndInternationalConferenceonHistoricalCryptology,HistoCrypt2019,June23-262019,Mons,Belgium,2019,pp.69–78.
[2].S.Kang,B.K.wana,andS.Uchida,“Compleximageprocessingwithlessdatadocumentimagebinarizationbyintegratingmultiplepretrainedu-netmodules,”PatternRecognition,vol.109,p.107577,2021.
[3].S.K.Jemni,M.A.Souibgui,Y.Kessentini,andA.Fornes,“Enhancetoreadbetter:Amulti-taskadversarialnetworkforhandwrittendocumentimageenhancement,”PatternRecognition,vol.123,p.108370,2022.
[4].M.Hradis,otera,P.Zemcık,andF.ˇSroubek,“Convolutionalneuralˇnetworksfordirecttextdeblurring,”inProceedingsofBMVC,vol.10,no.2,2015.
[5]PrasaduPeddi(2015)"Areviewofthe
academicachievementofstudents
utilisinglarge-scaledataanalysis",ISSN:
2057-5688,Vol7,Issue1,pp:28-35.
[6].M.A.SouibguiandY.Kessentini,“De-gan:Aconditionalgenerativeadversarialnetworkfordocumentenhancement,”IEEETransactionsonPatternAnalysisandMachineIntelligence,2020.
[7].Vaswani,N.Shazeer,N.Parmar,J.Uszkoreit,L.Jones,A.N.Gomez,Ł.Kaiser,andI.Polosukhin,“Attentionisallyouneed,”inAdvancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,2017,pp.5998–6008.
[8].J.Devlin,M.-W.hang,K.Lee,andK.
Toutanova,“Bert:Pre-trainingofdeep
bidirectionaltransformersforlanguage
understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805,2018
[9]PrasaduPeddi(2023).AI-Driven
Multi-FactorAuthenticationandDynamic
TrustManagementforSecuringMassive
MachineTypeCommunicationin6G
Networks.InternationalJournalofIntelligentSystemsandApplicationsin
Engineering,12(1s),361–374.
[10].N.Carion,F.Massa,G.Synnaeve,
N.Usunier,A.Kirillov,andS.Zagoruyko,
“End-to-endobjectdetectionwith
transformers,”inEuropeanConferenceon
ComputerVision.Springer,2020,pp.
213–229.
[11].F.Biten,R.Litman,Y.Xie,
S.Appalaraju,andR.Manmatha,“Latr:
Layout-awaretransformerforscene-text
vqa,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2112.12494,
2021
[12].C.Rouhou,M.Dhiaf,Y.Kessentini,
andS.B.Salem,“Transformerbased
approachforjointhandwritingandnamed
entityrecognitioninhistoricaldocument,”
PatternRecognitionLetters,2021.
[13]PrasaduPeddi(2019),"DataPullout
andfactsunearthinginbiological
Databases",InternationalJournalof
Techno-Engineering,Vol.11,issue1,pp:
25-32.
AUTHORS
Dr.Ch.V.PhaniKrishna,ProfessorDept.of
CSE,TeegalaKrishnaReddyEngineering
College,Meerpet,Hyderabad.
Email:hodcse@tkrec.ac.in
ISSN:2366-1313
VolumeIXIssueIAPRIL2024www.zkginternational.com 1166Miss.VedashriVitthalGore,Dept.ofCSE,
TeegalaKrishnaReddyEngineeringCollege,
Meerpet,Hyderabad.
Email:vedashrigore2020@gmail.com
Miss.SabavatSwapna,Dept.ofCSE,Teegala
KrishnaReddyEngineeringCollege,Meerpet,
Hyderabad.
Email:sabavatswapna123@gmail.com
Mr.PonnalaPranay,Dept.ofCSE,Teegala
KrishnaReddyEngineeringCollege,Meerpet,
Hyderabad.
Email:pranayponnala846@gmail.com
